How-to article for netem for network impairment simulation (#9)
maxlovic/srt-cookbook: docs/how-to-articles/how-to-simulate-networks-with-netem.md

> # Using NetEm to emulate networks

Reviewer: All headings should be written with capital letters. Change "Using NetEm to emulate networks" to "Using NetEm to Emulate Networks". Please look through the whole document and correct other heading as well.

! Prepositions shouldn't be written with capital letters.

> [NetEm](https://www.linux.org/docs/man8/tc-netem.html) (Network Emulator) is an enhancement of the Linux traffic control facilities that allow to add delay, packet loss, duplication and more other characteristics to packets outgoing from a selected  network  interface.  NetEm  is  built using  the  existing  Quality  Of Service (QOS) and Differentiated Services (diffserv) facilities in the Linux kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[NetEm](https://www.linux.org/docs/man8/tc-netem.html) (Network Emulator) is an enhancement of the Linux traffic control facilities that allow adding delay, packet loss, duplication and other characteristics to packets outgoing from a selected  network  interface.  NetEm  uses  the  existing  Quality  Of Service (QOS) and Differentiated Services (diffserv) facilities in the Linux kernel.
```

It's a great tool to test SRT connections with network impairments like on real networks.

## Installation 

> The Linux traffic control (tc) and NetEm (netem) are available in most linux distributions and typically part of the `iproute2` package.
> 
> On Ubuntu systems can be installed by following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Linux traffic control (tc) and NetEm (netem) are available in most Linux distributions, typically as part of the `iproute2` package.

On **Ubuntu** systems the `iproute2` package (including netem) can be installed using following command:
```

```
sudo apt-get install iproute2
```

> ## Installation on CentOS 8.2
> 
> On CentOS 8 it's part of `iproute-tc`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On **CentOS 8.2** the `iproute-tc` package (including netem) can be installed using following command:

On CentOS 8 it's part of `iproute-tc`
```

```
sudo yum install iproute-tc
```

> RHEL based systems like CentOS 8.2 might need an additional Kernel module, if the look-up of the name for `qdisc` fails, like in example shown below:
> 
> ```
> sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 10ms 10ms loss 2% rate 12mbit
> Error: Specified qdisc not found.
> ```
> 
> The modules `kernel-modules-extra` and `kernel-debug-modules-extra` can be installed with following command:
> 
> ```
> sudo yum install kernel-debug-modules-extra kernel-modules-extra
> ```
> 
> After installation a reboot is needed to activate the kernel modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: RHEL-based systems like CentOS 8.2 might need an additional kernel module in order to run netem. This would be indicated if, in running netem, the look-up of the name for `qdisc` fails, like in example shown below:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 10ms 10ms loss 2% rate 12mbit
Error: Specified qdisc not found.
```

In such a case, install the modules `kernel-modules-extra` and `kernel-debug-modules-extra` with following command:

```
sudo yum install kernel-debug-modules-extra kernel-modules-extra
```

After installation a reboot is needed to activate the kernel modules.
```

> ## Getting started with tc & netem
> 
> Following examples use the interface `enp7s0`. Modify to match your network adapter (e.g. `eth0`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Getting Started with tc & netem

The following examples use the interface `enp7s0`. Modify to match your network adapter (e.g. `eth0`).
```

To be able to change settings, root privileges are required.

> ### add delay

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Add Delay
```

> Please note: netem only adds delay to packets leaving the interface. If you want to simulate bi-directional delay two instances of tc netem - one on each end - are required. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: netem only adds delay to packets leaving the interface. If you want to simulate bi-directional delay two instances of tc netem - one on each end - are required. 
```

> following command adds 250 ms of delay to packets leaving interface `enp7s0`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following command adds 250 ms of delay to packets leaving interface `enp7s0`:
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 250ms
```

> ### add delay with volatility
> 
> Following command sets the transmission of enp7s0 network interface to be delayed by 100ms + 10ms (any value between 90 and 110 ms)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Add Delay with Volatility

The following command sets the transmission of enp7s0 network interface to be delayed by 100ms + 10ms (any value between 90 and 110 ms):
```

```
sudp tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 100ms 10ms
```

> The randomness of such fluctuations can be further specified:
> 
> Following command sets network interface enp7s0 transmission to 100 ms, while about 30% of the packets are delayed by +10 ms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The volatility (randomness) of such fluctuations can be further specified. The following command sets network interface enp7s0 transmission to 100 ms, while 30% of the packets selected at random are delayed by +10 ms:
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 100ms 10ms 30%
```

> ### adding packet loss
> 
> Following command sets the enp7s0 network interface transmission to randomly drop 1% of the packets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Adding Packet Loss

The following command sets the enp7s0 network interface transmission to randomly drop 1% of the packets:
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem loss 1%
```

> ### adding packet loss with success rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Adding Packet Loss with Success Rate
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem loss 1% 30%
```

> ### duplicating packets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Duplicating Packets
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem duplicate 1%
```

> ### corrupted packets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Corrupted Packets
```

> When Linux kernel version is above 2.6.16 packets can also be damaged. Following command randomly damages 0.2% of the outgoing packets:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Linux kernel versions above 2.6.16, netem can also simulate damage to packets. The following command randomly damages 0.2% of the outgoing packets:
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem corrupt 0.2%
```

### packet reordering

> Following command sets network interface enp7s0 transmission to sent out 25% Data package (with 50% relevance) immediately and delay all other packets by 10 ms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Packet Reordering

The following command sets network interface enp7s0 to send out 25% of data packets (with 50% relevance) immediately and delay all other packets by 10 ms.
```

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 10ms reorder 25% 50%
```

> ### view the configured network conditions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### View the Configured Network Conditions
```

    sudo tc qdisc show dev enp7s0

> ### stop network impairments
> 
> Please remember do disable the network impairments after tests are done:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Stopping Network Impairments

**IMPORTANT**: Please remember to disable the network impairments after tests are done by using the following command:
```

```
sudo tc qdisc del dev enp7s0 root netem
```

> Above command will delete configuration named `root` like in above examples.

Reviewer: I would also add a couple of good references in the end of the article. I usually follow the guidelines from these documents:
http://ce.sc.edu/cyberinfra/workshops/Material/NTP/Lab%204.pdf
https://www.cs.unm.edu/~crandall/netsfall13/TCtutorial.pdf

Consider creating ## References section.

> Above command will delete configuration named `root` like in above examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above command will delete the `root` configuration that was used in the examples above.
```

# Using NetEm to Emulate Networks

[NetEm](https://www.linux.org/docs/man8/tc-netem.html) (Network  Emulator) is an enhancement of the Linux traffic control facilities that allow adding delay, packet loss, duplication and other characteristics to packets outgoing from a selected  network  interface.  NetEm  uses  the  existing  Quality  Of Service (QOS) and Differentiated Services (diffserv) facilities in the Linux kernel.

It's a great tool to test SRT connections with network impairments like on real networks.

## Installation 

Linux traffic control (tc) and NetEm (netem) are available in most Linux distributions, typically as part of the `iproute2` package.

On **Ubuntu** systems the `iproute2` package (including netem) can be installed using following command:

```
sudo apt-get install iproute2
```

> ## Installation on CentOS 8.2

Reviewer: Change the heading to ###.

On **CentOS 8.2** the `iproute-tc` package (including netem) can be installed using following command:

```
sudo yum install iproute-tc
```

**NOTE**: RHEL-based systems like CentOS 8.2 might need an additional kernel module in order to run netem. This would be indicated if, in running netem, the look-up of the name for `qdisc` fails, like in example shown below:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 10ms 10ms loss 2% rate 12mbit
Error: Specified qdisc not found.
```

In such a case, install the modules `kernel-modules-extra` and `kernel-debug-modules-extra` with following command:

```
sudo yum install kernel-debug-modules-extra kernel-modules-extra
```

After installation a reboot is needed to activate the kernel modules.

## Getting Started with TC & NetEm

The following examples use the interface `enp7s0`. Modify to match your network adapter (e.g. `eth0`).

To be able to change settings, root privileges are required.

> ### Add Delay

Reviewer: Add -> Adding

> **NOTE**: netem only adds delay to packets leaving the interface. If you want to simulate bi-directional delay two instances of tc netem - one on each end - are required. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: netem only adds delay to packets leaving the interface. If you want to simulate bi-directional delay, two instances of tc netem - one on each end - are required. 
```

The following command adds 250 ms of delay to packets leaving interface `enp7s0`:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 250ms
```

> ### Add Delay with Volatility

Reviewer: Add -> Adding

The following command sets the transmission of enp7s0 network interface to be delayed by 100ms + 10ms (any value between 90 and 110 ms):

```
sudp tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 100ms 10ms
```

The volatility (randomness) of such fluctuations can be further  specified. The following command sets network interface enp7s0  transmission to 100 ms, while 30% of the packets selected at random are delayed by +10 ms:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 100ms 10ms 30%
```

### Adding Packet Loss

The following command sets the enp7s0 network interface transmission to randomly drop 1% of the packets:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem loss 1%
```

### Adding Packet Loss with Success Rate

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem loss 1% 30%
```

> ### Duplicating Packets

Reviewer: Duplicated Packets

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem duplicate 1%
```

### Corrupted Packets

For Linux kernel versions above 2.6.16, netem can also simulate damage to packets. The following command randomly damages 0.2% of the outgoing packets:

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem corrupt 0.2%
```

### Packet Reordering

The following command sets network interface enp7s0 to send out 25% of data packets (with 50% relevance) immediately and delay all other packets by 10 ms.

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev enp7s0 root netem delay 10ms reorder 25% 50%
```

### View the Configured Network Conditions

    sudo tc qdisc show dev enp7s0

### Stopping Network Impairments

**IMPORTANT**: Please remember to disable the network impairments after tests are done by using the following command:

```
sudo tc qdisc del dev enp7s0 root netem
```

The above command will delete the `root` configuration that was used in the examples above.

## Further Reading

These were just some basic examples to get started. TC & NetEm allow complex simulations and more information can be found at following links:

> http://ce.sc.edu/cyberinfra/workshops/Material/NTP/Lab%204.pdf

Reviewer: I would suggest adding the names of the documents so that there are clickable + make a list of two references.
